---
layout: post
title: "Greeting Cards 2024"
date:  2025-01-01 09:14:20 -0800
categories: art
published: true
lede: "2024's cards with pixel art fireworks"
---

**Card Series:**
- 2021 - [maps and multilingual messages]({% post_url 2022-01-01-cards-2021 %})
- 2022 - [block printed corgis]({% post_url 2023-01-01-cards-2022 %})
- 2023 - [corgi visual anagram illusions]({% post_url 2024-01-01-cards-2023 %})
- 2024 - **pixel art fireworks**

## Initial thoughts
Last year, I made use of a generative macchine learning model that made super cool art, but  itdidn't feel like I personally was making something for friends and family. More like Iwas pushing a button for  them. This year, though I was quite busy with work, I wanted the art to actually be something I designed, not so difficult to make, but still different for every recipient. And also interesting. And also roughly on time. Surely that would be possible!

## A thought I've had for a while

One idea that had come up for the past two years was making use of a neat tool called [vpype-pixelart](https://github.com/abey79/vpype-pixelart) that can facilitate printing pixel art using a 2-D pen plotter like the axidraw we have. I wasn't sure exactly what the art should be, but for the past two years I have thought about making fireworks of some kind. I've always thought that video game fireworks were pretty neat.

I tested using this tool during the year to make a few other cards. One of which is this Pikachu.

{% include img-gallery.html filenames="cards-2024-9.jpg"%}

To test the idea of fireworks, I drew fireworks using [pixelart.com](https://www.pixilart.com/) and made the following elaborate firework.

{% include img-gallery.html filenames="cards-2024-2.jpg,cards-2024-8.jpg"%}


## Customizablilty

Now that I had a proof of concept in hand, I wanted make it complicated. How cool would it be to randomly generate unique fireworks for every card!? I saw a [neat video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=brsn7a7HTr0) about the Computer Fireworks Celebration Kit on the Commodore 64, and thought it must  be possible to do that sort of thing. Then life got in the way and I ran out of time and energy to program something like that. Instead, I opted to make a few different varieties of fireworks big and small, and combine them differently to make each card unique.

To make them, I started with pictures  of existing pixel fireworks from the internet and traced  over them,  but I found that exactly tracing an existing design didn't look great, so I used the pictures  more as inspiration and made my own designs on top of them.


### Big fireworks
{% include img-gallery.html filenames="cards-2024-big_fireworks_1.jpg,cards-2024-big_fireworks_2.jpg,cards-2024-big_fireworks_3.jpg,cards-2024-big_fireworks_4.jpg,cards-2024-big_fireworks_5.jpg,cards-2024-big_fireworks_6.jpg,cards-2024-big_fireworks_7.jpg,cards-2024-big_fireworks_8.jpg,cards-2024-big_fireworks_9.jpg,cards-2024-big_fireworks_10.jpg"%}

### Little fireworks
{% include img-gallery.html filenames="cards-2024-big_fireworks_1.jpg,cards-2024-small_fireworks_2.jpg,cards-2024-small_fireworks_3.jpg,cards-2024-small_fireworks_4.jpg,cards-2024-small_fireworks_5.jpg,cards-2024-small_fireworks_6.jpg,cards-2024-small_fireworks_7.jpg,cards-2024-small_fireworks_8.jpg,cards-2024-small_fireworks_9.jpg,cards-2024-small_fireworks_10.jpg"%}

## Fonts
To  add to the uniqueness and the pixel  art vibe, I wanted to use pixel text for the  Happy New Year message. At  first, I looked for  pixel art  text generators and tried  designingmy  own font before realizinng that I could use the same technique  I was using for the fireworks!  I could find existing interesting pixel fonts,  and just trace over them pixel srt style. That took a bit of time, but was very successful.

{% include img-gallery.html filenames="cards-2024-1.jpg"%}


## Printing

We continue to make great use of the Axidraw and used that along with some bright (and sometimes metallic) gel pens to print the fireworks. Each page took 45-55 minutes to print.

{% include img-gallery.html filenames="cards-2024-7.jpg,cards-2024-3.jpg,cards-2024-4.jpg,cards-2024-5.jpg,cards-2024-6.jpg"%}

Then we used the axidraw to write the insides of the cards as usual.


## Assembly

Like last year, I printed everything seperately, cut slots in the corners of the cards, and assembled all the pieces. After a few long hours of cutting and assembling (while watching the Big Fat Quiz of the Year and of Everything), they were  ready  to go!

{% 
include caption-img.html image="cards-2024-fronts.gif" caption="A small  sample of possible card designs."
alt = "An animation showing several card faces, each with the words Happy New Year and a different large firework in the middle with two smaller fireworks on either side."
%}



## Supplies
Thanks to projects we've made in the past, everything used (except the gel pens) was left over from past projects.

In the end, we used the following supplies to make this year's cards:
- 100lb (270g/m^2) 12x18 inch Neenah Smooth Digital cover paper 
- Fabriano black paper
- Affinity Designer/Photo for making the pixel art (make sure to turn off dithering!)
- GellyRoll moonlight gel pens for the art on the front
- Zebra SARASA 0.5mm pens (for writing the cards and drawing art on the inside)
- custom 3D printed corner cutting guide ([view in Tinkercad](https://www.tinkercad.com/things/bjks6s80mZ9-copy-of-funky-hillar-leelo))
- custom 3D printed scoring board ([view in Tinkercad](https://www.tinkercad.com/things/0FMrzRjCEqv-scoring-board?sharecode=iacNNWoAB4mOoop02BMwoJWYmEo8Tm5d2ru5XGqReqE))
- a tool for scoring the cards
- various cutting tools including a double sided Exacto knife


## Lessons learned

**It feels better to actually make it**

Designing and making them myself felt so much better than clicking a button repeatedly last year.

**More composability is worth it**

This year, I didn't print the art directly on the card, I printed it on smaller pagers, cut those out, and inserted the final results into the cards. This really helps with when things go wrong. I don't need to remake the entire card, I just just remake the art on the front!

**Don't cut by hand**

I really should have bought a paper cutting guillotine much sooner. It made cutting so much faster and cleaner.

